---
layout: post
title: "Why this?"
author: "Jakob Meier"
categories: Blogging
tags: [blogging,writing,meta,about,jekyll,gh-pages]
image: 18/fields_of_flowers.jpg
image_tooltip: A green field
lang: en
ref: why-this
techs: 
  gh-pages:
    title: "Github Pages"
    description: "I am using Github Pages as a free hosting service for both my code base and the actual web page."
    url: "https://pages.github.com/"
    img: github.jpg
  jekyll:
    title: "Jekyll"
    description: "The basis for this webpage. On every push on to my Git repository, it builds the website automatically and publishes it.<br>I just learned about Jekyll as I started this project. It is super easy to use and helps creating content quickly."
    url: "https://jekyllrb.com/"
    img: jekyll.png
  
  
---

<p class="intro">Why creating this public place in cyberspace? Why sharing personal ideas in a written form?</p>

Well, the Internet has quickly become a substantial part of human civilization. Both commercially and privately. But I have never been an active part of social media nor did I really participate actively in any online community. So far, I have almost exclusively used the Internet mostly as a consumer. This, I want to change.

I want to start contributing something from my side to the World Wide Web. Writing down some of my experiences from personal projects will act as a great start. It will also give me a face in cyberspace which people can find if they are looking for me. And the created profile of mine is 100% in my control, thanks to my personal domain and some <a href="#tech-stack-anker">awesome open source technologies.</a>

Speaking of which, learning about new technologies is really what this platform is about. Partially for potential readers but mostly for myself. I love exploring all kinds of available technologies. Creating and maintaining a public documentation of my personal projects will help me to focus and reflect. On top of that, documenting is also a good skill to practice in and of itself.

I don't expect this to become a crowded place. In fact, probably almost nobody will see this besides the people I already know in person. Never the less, just like we care about our outfits and our behaviour in the real world, I am willing to spend a good amount of my attention to my outfit in digital space.
